Introduction to Programming & Python

1. What is Programming?

Programming means giving instructions to a computer to perform a specific task.

Example:

print("Hello world")

2. What is a Programming Language?

A programming language is used to communicate with a computer and create applications.

Examples: Python, Java, C, C++

3. Programming Paradigms

A programming paradigm is a way or style of writing programs.

Types: Procedural Programming and OOP.

4. Procedural Programming

Procedural programming solves a problem step by step using functions.

Example:

login()

payment()

confirm_order()

5. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)

OOP organizes programs using classes and objects and is useful for large applications.

Example:

Car → color, model, start()

6. Procedural vs OOP

Procedural focuses on functions, while OOP focuses on objects.

Example:

Procedural → calculate_bill()

OOP → Customer, Product

7. What is Python?

Python is a simple, high-level programming language known for its readability and easy syntax.

Example:

name = "sai"

print(name)

8. Features of Python

Python is easy to learn, interpreted, dynamically typed, object-oriented, and has many libraries.

Example:

x = 20

Here, we don't need to specify int.

9. Why Python?

Python needs less code and is useful in many fields, so development becomes faster and easier.

Example:

print("Hello World")

10. History of Python

Python was created by Guido van Rossum and was first released in 1991.

Example: Python → named after Monty Python's Flying Circus.

11. Applications of Python

Python is used in web development, AI, data science, automation, cybersecurity, and more.

Example:

Django → Web Development

Pandas → Data Science

12. Memory Allocation

Memory allocation means storing variables, functions, and objects in computer memory while a program runs.

Example:

x = 20

Here, memory is allocated to store 10.

13. Procedural Memory

Procedural programs mainly work with variables and function calls, so they usually use less memory.

Example:

x = 20

calculate()

14. OOP Memory

In OOP, objects store their own data, so more memory may be required.

Example:

Car Object

color = "blue"

model = "tata"

15. Procedural vs OOP Memory

Procedural programming generally uses less memory, while OOP may use more because of object creation.

Example:

Procedural → Variables + Functions

OOP → Objects + Attributes